---
layout: post
title: "On Essential Things"
excerpt: " This was an article I wrote in 2020. For now it acts as a placeholder."
categories: essays
tags: [ Minimalism ]

date: 2022-05-02T10:0 8:50-04:00

---

Alice was making her daily entry in her Journal. She is aspiring to be a physicist. She wrote,

    - Today was a productive day.
    - I read a novel on time-travel.
    - I published an article on my blog.
    - I worked out for an hour.

But then when you look closer. Was it a productive day?

Did she get anything done which brought her closer to her life goal? I’d say NO.

(PS: One such day, is not going to have a drastic impact but, over long periods, this can be devastating.)

We often categorize our days as productive when we get anything done. If you binge-watch shows and lie in your bed for the whole day, we classify it as unproductive. But there’s a flaw here if we are getting things done, just for the sake of doing it, then we are failing ourselves. Productivity is not about doing more tasks. It is all about doing the right ones.

There is a need to prioritize our lives if we don’t, then someone else will do it for us. We have the absolute control to decide what truly matters, but we hardly exercise this right. For someone who wants to be a physicist, he must read more physics and sharpen his necessary tools. Everything else takes second precedent. For someone who wants to be a musician, he must practise every day.

Only a few things matter in our lives and, we cannot do all that we want to do. The essential tasks are those which are massively important than the rest of the lot. The process of prioritizing includes the important task of asking yourself some questions.

    - Are you under-investing in something essential? What is it?
    - What are the adjustments and changes which you need to do, to invest the right amount of time?
    - How much time is the right amount of time?

You will only be able to answer these questions if you review your days. So start planning your days, stick to the plans, record the days and finally at the end of the week review your week. After two or three weeks, you’ll be able to pinpoint your inadequacies. Once you have your data, you can answer the above questions empirically. You will also be able to point out the unessential tasks in which you are over-investing. Eliminate or constrict them. This way you can be more productive by doing less.

To conclude, we spend a lot of time on unessential tasks, which then take precedent over the essentials. Due to this, we start to spiral downwards, away from our intentional goals and targets. We need to invest in our essential tasks. The first step to do so is in reviewing our daily habits over a week. Once we have data, we need to adjust our system to aim at our desired goals.
